---
draft: true
---

I don't think I'm alone in feeling like my life has a soundtrack, a lot of which is out of my control. As much as I try to curate the sounds I am surrounded by, a lot of stuff that I wouldn't choose gets through and finds a salience in my little brain that triggers nearly a nearly disembodying sense of place and time. As much as I know that I don't want to be a Dave Matthews fan, you couldn't walk across my college campus in the Fall of '94 without hearing "Ants Marching" echoing out the windows of nearly every dorm you passed. He came up again on a night home from school a few years later with the release of their next album. My best friend from highschool, Dave, was in town, and we were driving to a little get-together that would be a memorable night. Dave had a habit of getting sucked into certain albums and it was infectious the way he made you believe it was the best thing around. This happened to us my senior year. Counting Crows "August and Everything After" is a funny one. First, he was obsessed with it but it was also one of the albums in the 5-disc changer at a restaurant I worked at. It usually came on early in the evening but I mostly remember hearing "'Round Here" late at night on its second rotation while I was stacking chairs and cleaning up. It was a bummer of a song and gelled with my feeling that I was going nowhere. I was supposed to head off to the aforementioned college in the Fall, but my grades my last semester were less than stellar. I got a letter from them in the mail asking me to offer an explaination. I never responded. I didn't know how, or I was overwhelmed with fear, or whatever but I didn't so I assumed I was going to get a subsequent letter telling me to fuck off and I was going to spend the rest of my life bussing tables at Bobby's Bistro. Meanwhile, Dave would blare "Mr. Jones" and rock out in the car and we'd have a blast. He did this with Green Day's "Dookie" as well. You'll notiec this were all very popular albums. It really ruined his street cred but it was infectious the way he made you believe him. He'd do it in subsequent years with other albums and he actually got me and my now wife to come out to Coachella the year of the indie bands.  