---
title: "A Phenomenological Exploration of the Ontological Effects of Alcohol and Drug Addiction"
date: 2020-09-16
draft: false
description: "The intention of this paper is to introduce the idea that experiencing an alcoholic bottom is akin to a trauma."
tags: ["phenomenology", "addiction", "Levinas", "philosophy"]
---

A Phenomenological Exploration of the Ontological Effects of Alcohol and Drug Addiction 

The intention of this paper is to introduce the idea that experiencing an alcoholic bottom is akin to a trauma of a kind and may, therefore, be the basis for cases of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  There are many cases wherein drug and/or alcohol abuse or addiction co-occurs with an instance of PTSD, but it is concluded or assumed that they are separate matters or, more often, that the PTSD has exacerbated a reaction in the form of addiction to cope with the symptoms.  I would like to suggest that the existential trauma experienced by the suffering alcoholic may be more pronounced than a mere state of being.  In "A Phenomenology of Addiction," David Lenson attempts to provide a phenomenological account of the nature of addiction.  While his insights regarding temporality are interesting and will be explored in this paper, his focus on the mechanism of addiction, while topical, is not phenomenological insofar as it ignores the lived experience of the addict.  In his chapter, Lenson (1995) proposes that "Unless drinking comes to engulf all hours of the day. . . the division of the day into drinking and sober hours provides a relativity for time atomized by addiction. When one drinks all the time, that relativity is lost, and the drinker is 'bottoming out.'  It is at this stage that drinkers either die or seek help" (p.44).  This is an oversimplification if not entirely inaccurate.  In fact, the focus of this paper is that the very stage of 'bottoming out' is not so temporally distinct and an immediate vector towards death or recovery is rarely quickly determined.  Once the relativity of time is lost, the alcoholic is in a state of suspension that can last years or decades.  In this state one experiences the "existential vacuum" of which Victor Frankl speaks in his memoir of the death camps (2019, p.105).  
As I am not a psychiatrist, I cannot speak to an actual diagnosis of PTSD but I am able to assess and regurgitate the diagnostic criteria set forth in the discipline’s standard diagnostic text – the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-V).  There are eight separate criteria for diagnosing PTSD:
1.	Criterion A: Stressor
2.	Criterion B: Intrusion Symptoms
3.	Criterion C: Avoidance
4.	Criterion D: Negative alterations in cognitions and mood
5.	Criterion E: Alterations in arousal and reactivity
6.	Criterion F: Duration
7.	Criterion G: Functional significance
8.	Criterion H: Exclusion
Criterion A is the “trauma” of the condition and is defined as: 
The person was exposed to: death, threatened death, actual or threatened serious injury, or actual or threatened sexual violence, in the following way(s):
•	Direct exposure
•	Witnessing the trauma
•	Learning that a relative or close friend was exposed to a trauma
•	Indirect exposure to aversive details of the trauma, usually in the course of professional duties (e.g., first responders, medics) (brainline.org, 2019).

I propose that the process of reaching and the experience of the alcoholic bottom qualifies as a trauma by this definition.
Before the so-called bottom, there is a phase in which the drinker, who is now a problem drinker, suffers from exhaustion.  The compulsion to achieve or maintain a certain level of intoxication has eclipsed the desire to be sober.  This may have been the case insofar as the preference for inebriation existed in whatever phase preceded this, but it is now a compulsion - an overwhelming preference to the state of having-had-a-drink.  There may be a physical addiction, but it is not necessary.  Whatever that looks like varies from person to person and the level of intoxication may fluctuate from the very mild to the inebriated but, to be sure, the preference is evident.  Most alcoholics maintain that a level of belongingness was lacking from their sober life from a social perspective.  The lulling qualities of alcohol offer respite from a general state of anxiety - both in the presence of others as a social creature and as a lone existent in the world-at-large.
Levinas takes up a certain mode of Sartrean nothingness in that of refusal. Sartre says that “nothingness stands at the origin of the negative judgment because it is itself negation. It founds the negation as an act because it is the negation as being.” Nothingness as negation interests Levinas. He is specifically interested in fatigue and indolence.  While tackled in the opposite order in Existence and Existents, these two conditions are well-known to the alcoholic.  The first is this Levinasian fatigue.  Fatigue is the refusal to maintain a level of exerted effort.  For the alcoholic, the living of life in this anxious state makes for persistent effort as one shoulders a lode – a constant struggle to plod through the day-to-day meaninglessness of the mundane to look forward only to the chemical release of intoxication whence the burden is set down and the comfort of carefree existence welcomes one like a long-loyal pet.  Levinas (2017) says:
The numbness of fatigue is a telling characteristic. It is an impossibility of following through, a constant and increasing lag between being and what it remains attached to, like a hand little by little letting slip what it is trying to hold on to, letting go even while it tightens its grip. Fatigue is not just the cause of this letting go, it is the slackening itself. It is so inasmuch as it does not occur simply in a hand that is letting slip the weight it finds tiring to lift, but in one that is holding on to what it is letting slip, even when it has let it drop but remains taut with the effort. For there is fatigue only in effort and labor (p.18-9).
The exhaustion of fatigue forces one to be out-of-step with the present - one falters and is unable to keep up with the world.  In this state, one begins to question the purpose of taking up such effort in order to merely exist.  The melancholia experienced is a sort of ontological violence.  The same fatigue is experienced by the suicidal and chronically depressed.  Fatigue leads to weariness and the weariness is a tacit refusal toward existence.  Weariness is a state of refusal to accept the burden of existence – it is when we are reminded that being is a burden in itself.  It is once this state of fatigue is exhausted, so to speak, when the effort is abandoned and the weight is dropped and weariness overwhelms that one reaches that bottom and adopts a state of plain forsaken indolence.
Indolence is not the lack of action - it is the lack of inception.  But the horizon of the bottomed-out alcoholic has collapsed. The lack of action “is an impossibility of beginning, or, if one prefers, it is the effecting of beginning. It may inhere in the act that is being realized, in which case the performance rolls on as on a ill-paved road, jolted about by instants each of which is a beginning all over again" (Levinas, 2017, p.13).  The alcoholic knows its condition.  An alcoholic in his depths is incapable of conceiving of himself as anything other than a consumer of alcohol. He is shackled to whims of the physical and psychic drive to both sate the physiological chemical need and the existential drive toward intoxication in order to ignore the meaninglessness of their lives. The physical addiction is common but not requisite to experience this state.  Even without the physiological addiction, the body still craves the drink just as the mind does.  An alcoholic involuntarily renounces his being-for-itself and is reduced to being alcoholic-in-itself.  Gone is the freedom of being defined off-the-cuff as the actor of an action and left is the machine that consumes, depletes, pursues, and consumes.  Only in the moment as he awakes and transitions from an insomniac’s sleep does the alcoholic have any freedom and it is the defining moment of his existence every time: "Do I alleviate this suffering by consuming more or do I walk through the fire in hopes that it has another side?" His only freedom is the freedom to be anything else, any being for-itself, which is the ultimate freedom, but one that presents a daunting challenge.  Choosing to continue to suffer the alcoholic existence is an ontological death – his being-for-himself has been stripped away and the dignity of being a being-for-itself has been forsaken.
There is a temporal aspect to this trauma.  Heidegger’s Dasein is inherently personal – it is the being one has.  Levinas removes a gap in talking about the presence of existence in and of itself.  Merleau-Ponty calls it the night (“Night is not an object before me; it enwraps me and infiltrates through all my senses, stifling my recollections and almost destroying my personal identity” (Merleau-Ponty, 2014, p.330)), Levinas calls it the il y ya: the there is:
The impossibility of rending the invading, inevitable, and anonymous rustling of existence manifests itself particularly in certain times when sleep evades our appeal. One watches on when there is nothing to watch and despite the absence of any reason for remaining watchful. The bare fact of presence is oppressive; one is held by being, held to be. One is detached from any object, any content, yet there is presence. This presence which arises behind nothingness is neither a being, nor consciousness functioning in a void, but the universal fact of the there is, which encompasses things and consciousness (2017, p.61).  

The alcoholic is chronically impaired and often suffers memory loss – not to mention the possibility of black-outs.  If one cannot remember, there is no before; it could not have been experienced because there is no memory that accounts for it.  Heidegger tells us that “what is, is in time” (2005, p.234) and that time is “something counted in connection with encountered motion with a view to the before and after , in the horizon of the earlier and later. . . Time is counted time” (2005, p.240).  What form of existence can be without time?  The alcoholic has a special relationship with time.  Lenson accurately describes the metamorphosis of the addict or alcoholic’s notion of time:
[W]hat began as a kairos—a special occasion or privileged moment—through repetition assumes the role of chronos or horizontal time. What characterizes the condition of addiction is above all else the atomization of time, the replacement of conventionally measured seconds, minutes, hours, and days with a different chronometry based on the tempo of administration (1995, p.35)
Here, Lenson is talking about a change in the very nature of temporality for the afflicted.  He suggests that all time is relative to the administration of the user’s “drug of choice.”  
Even if he can remember, how can he trust this memory?  This is a sort of madness, this permanent state of delirium and doubting of his past.  Levinas talks about the state of insomnia:
The consciousness of a thinking subject, with its capacity for evanescence, sleep and unconsciousness, is precisely the breakup of the insomnia of anonymous being, the possibility to ‘suspend,’ to escape from this corybantic necessity, to take refuge in oneself so as to withdraw from being, to, like Penelope, have a night to oneself to undo the work looked after and supervised during the day (2017, p.62).
Consciousness and sleep are the escape from insomnia, but the intoxicated remains ever in an anonymous state.  In insomnia, the subject becomes the object of existence, it is the “night itself that watches” (Levinas, 2017, p.63).  The particular problem of intoxication and delirium is in that lack of tangible experience. In this state one “can surprise this impersonal ‘consciousness’ into which insomnia sinks. The fatality of these strange states, which it is impossible to recount, is due to the fact that they do not happen to me as their subject” (Levinas, 2017, p.63).  The reason that there is no experience is that the subject has become the object – it is the night experiencing the alcoholic, not the other way around as though instead of the ocean getting me wet, the ocean got me’d instead and I am effectively inert.  This is the constant state of the suffering alcoholic – as a non-existent, a being that has forsaken being, without time, an orienting horizon, a future or a past.  It is a negation of being while still being embodied, being of-itself.  Longing for sleep, to find a “base” from which to seep into unconsciousness.  For Levinas, this is the respite from consciousness that insomnia mocks: 
Sleep is like entering into contact with the protective forces of a place; to seek after sleep is to gropingly seek after that contact. Where one wakes up one finds oneself shut up in one's immobility like an egg in its shell. This surrender to a base which also offers refuge constitutes sleep, in which a being, without being destroyed is suspended (2017, p.67).

A commonly held belief among alcoholics at their bottom, a reason cited as a condition under which recovery methods that have worked for others will not work for them, is that they are unique.  This state is referred to as terminal uniqueness.  I am reminded of Paul Bäumer’s character from All Quiet on the Western Front.  He notes an estrangement that he and his peers feel from the world now that they are soldiers.  Not because they are soldiers per se, but because of their experience of the world having left the normal world before they had a life and being thrust into one that is of another reality.
Kantorek would say that we stood on the threshold of life. And so it would seem. We had as yet taken no root. The war swept us away. For the others, the older men, it is but an interruption. They are able to think beyond it. We, however, have been gripped by it and do not know what the end may be. We know only that in some strange and melancholy way we have become a waste land. All the same, we are not often sad (Remarque & Wheen, 2013, p.20).
  
For the older men, this is a temporary departure from normal – an effort, to be sure, but one through which they can sustain themselves by having a world to return to.  Paul and his peers were sent to war before they had a chance to become.  The suffering alcoholic, too, has nothing to return to, no frame of reference for what a world without the chaos of alcoholic living looks like.  They have slowly streamlined their lives to best accommodate for their lifestyle and it does not resemble those of the people they see walking down the street – the person going to a job where they are fulfilled or to a family that loves them.  The alcoholic, in his solipsism, even with a job and a family, does not regard themselves as belonging to those things.  They are separated by a gulf of misery and selfishness that sees them as mere mechanisms in their lives.
The alcoholic at this stage has long isolated himself from the relatable gaze of others - it is, after all, a combative and defensive subject which welcomes those do-gooders who try to deter the alcoholic's habits for their own good.  Accordingly, one finds themselves avoiding the company of others preferring self-serving judgment of their own impaired psyche that defers a self-centered account of one's behavior.  Husserl (2013) speaks of the importance of intersubjectivity in apprehending a world to Be In:
Something that exists is in intentional communion with something else that exists. It is an essentially unique connectedness, an actual community and precisely the one that makes transcendentally possible the being of a world, a world of men and things" (p.129 - emphasis in original text).

The uniqueness that the alcoholic attributes to itself manifests itself in such a way as to make intersubjectivity unlikely, if not impossible.  The alcoholic tends toward a self-imposed solitude.  For Husserl , the other, “my own concrete personhood is not ‘first’ from my perspective but is, rather, transferred over to me analogically through my experience of the first objective person in my world: the other” (Guenther, 2013, p.33).  While little has been written about the solitude of addiction, Lisa Guenther has written extensively on the experience of supermax prisoners in solitary confinement. While the conditions are different, the lived experience of isolation borne by the self-isolating alcoholic and the compulsory isolation of the prisoner are worth comparing.  Guenther notes:
The testimony of survivors of solitary confinement suggests that if one is deprived for long enough of the experience of other concrete persons in a shared or common space, it is possible for one’s own sense of personhood to diminish or even collapse, while the transcendental ego, or the pure capacity for experience, remains, now unhinged from a shared world in which its perpetual flow of impressions could receive the bodily validation of others (2013, p.34).
Guenther moves on to Heidegger’s Dasein and its relationship with the world as a being-in-the-world.  For Heidegger, a unique isolation from others in the form of anxiety is the result of contending with the notion of one’s own death.  One’s own being-towards-death cannot be shared and exists in a future that will never be present – it will just come without me.  For Heidegger, “this isolation is a condition for the possibility of authentic Being-with-others, where social life does not suppress the individuation of Dasein but, rather, supports it (Guenther, 2013, p.202).  Levinas, in his notion of the il y ya, the ‘bare’ existence, explains that the self is locked up with itself in isolation.  While the original intention of the penitentiary was to lock oneself up with himself in a sort of forced self-reflection, Levinas reveals the torturous nature of being without others and simply being stuck with ones self.  The moi and the soi make up a duality that one is forced to shoulder:
The solitude of a subject is more than the isolation of a being or the unity of an object. It is, as it were, a dual solitude: this other than me accompanies the ego like a shadow. It is the duality of boredom, which is something different from the social existence we know in the world, to which the ego turns in fleeing its boredom; it is also something different from the relationship with the other which detaches the ego from itself. This duality awakens the nostalgia for escape, but no unknown skies, no new land can satisfy it, for we bring ourselves along in our travels (Levinas, 2017, p.90).
For the prisoner, Guenther’s research reveals the nature of this burden.  While the penitence was meant to lead to spiritual reform,
the capacity to reflect becomes a source of pathology and suffering rather than moral and spiritual transformation when it is cut off from the network of worldly, intercorporeal relations that would otherwise support meaning by allowing subjects to be absorbed in something or someone other than themselves. (2013, p.199)

It is a pathological need to resist any likeness to others in order to protect the creature from having to abandon its addiction.  If we are to take Husserl seriously, one must wonder if the suffering are able to feel attached to the world in any way.  They are left with the solipsism of an inebriated ego to exist as the lone sufferer amongst a population of alien and incompatible egos.  This is a sort of social death that coincides with the existential death he is suffering through.  
In having a predominant being-for, the alcoholic sacrifices the nothingness that Sartre would say makes him human, his possibilities are not contingent but are rather exhausted.  The only future action that can be taken up is that of forsaking the alcohol - without this nothing else is possible.  The turn sobriety is the beginning his indolence has eluded, for "To begin for good is to begin in the inalienable possession of oneself. It is then to be unable to turn back; it is to set sail and cut the moorings. From then on one has to run through the adventure to its end" (Levinas, 2017, p.15).  He knows that stopping is an irrevocable decision - even if he were to start again, the knowledge that his nature is now such that he has chosen to not be a drinker of spirits and even if he fails and falls off-the-wagon, his nature is now one of sobriety and that haunts him. Once this turn has taken place, he is no longer able to reassume his role as an active alcoholic.  He is now doomed to a life he is unfamiliar with - for it has been quite a long time since his bleary eyes have looked soberly upon the landscape ahead.  He has a horizon that is not tethered to an impaired state of confusion.  He is thinking clearly and knows that this is his natural state and the one he must learn to accept.  The option of artificially handicapping his knowledge of his existence is no longer a viable one.  Sure, he can give it another go - tie one on and hope to return to the ease with which he strutted through town on an evening long ago, but this is not what he finds.  He finds he is immediately back to the weariness of refusing to exist, to the fatigue of owning an existence that is not only burdensome but is without a future.  Now his life is defined by another refusal, another nothingness - that of abstention and it is that negation, the negative comportment-toward-being that will be the horizon by which he navigates.
	These existential and social deaths constitute a trauma by the DSM-V’s definition of Criterion A of PTSD.  In early sobriety, the remaining criterion are prevalent.  Brainline.org summarizes them as follows:
Criterion B: intrusion symptoms (one required)
The traumatic event is persistently re-experienced in the following way(s):
•	Unwanted upsetting memories
•	Nightmares
•	Flashbacks
•	Emotional distress after exposure to traumatic reminders
•	Physical reactivity after exposure to traumatic reminders
Criterion C: avoidance (one required)
Avoidance of trauma-related stimuli after the trauma, in the following way(s):
•	Trauma-related thoughts or feelings
•	Trauma-related external reminders
Criterion D: negative alterations in cognitions and mood (two required)
Negative thoughts or feelings that began or worsened after the trauma, in the following way(s):
•	Inability to recall key features of the trauma
•	Overly negative thoughts and assumptions about oneself or the world
•	Exaggerated blame of self or others for causing the trauma
•	Negative affect
•	Decreased interest in activities
•	Feeling isolated
•	Difficulty experiencing positive affect
Criterion E: alterations in arousal and reactivity
Trauma-related arousal and reactivity that began or worsened after the trauma, in the following way(s):
•	Irritability or aggression
•	Risky or destructive behavior
•	Hypervigilance
•	Heightened startle reaction
•	Difficulty concentrating
•	Difficulty sleeping
Criterion F: duration (required)
Symptoms last for more than 1 month.
Criterion G: functional significance (required)
Symptoms create distress or functional impairment (e.g., social, occupational).
Criterion H: exclusion (required)
Symptoms are not due to medication, substance use, or other illness. (brainline.org, 2019)
All of these symptoms are experienced by the recovering alcoholic during early sobriety.  Unfortunately, Criterion H makes moot all of this diagnostic information.  Listing symptoms due to substance use as exclusionary, one does not meet the necessary conditions to be diagnosed with PTSD.  I am not sure if this is important or not.  My focus has been on qualifying the experience of addiction at large as being a traumatic experience that may require more unique treatment methods than have been explored in the past.  This is not a unique take, only a unique application of the existential vacuum that one can find themselves in when confronted with terms of life which one cannot accept.  Serena Parekh invokes Hannah Arendt in discussing the experience of the displaced refugee or, as Arendt often refers to them, the “stateless” (Arendt, 1985, p.267).  Parekh refers to the loss of political identity as “the ontological deprivation, that is, the loss of something fundamental to a person’s humanity” (Parekh, 2018, p.83).  These temporary deaths I speak are such ontological deprivations and the have arguably lasting effects on one’s sense on personhood.  


 
References

Arendt, H. (1985). The origins of totalitarianism. Antisemitism. San Diego, NY, London: Harcourt Brace.
Brainline.org. (2019, April 10). DSM-5 Criteria for PTSD. Retrieved October 13, 2020, from https://www.brainline.org/article/dsm-5-criteria-ptsd
Frankl, V. E., Lasch, I., Kushner, H. S., & Winslade, W. J. (2019). Man's search for meaning. Boston: Beacon Press.
Guenther, L. (2013). Solitary confinement: Social death and its afterlives. University of Minnesota Press.
Heidegger, M., Hofstadter, A., & Heidegger, M. (2005). The basic problems of phenomenology. Bloomington, Indianapolis: Indiana Univ. Press.
Heidegger, M., Schmidt, D. J., & Stambaugh, J. (2010). Being and time: A revised edition of the Stambaugh translation. Albany, NY: State Univ. of New York Press.
Husserl, E. (2013). Cartesian meditations: An introduction to phenomenology. Lexington KY: Kluwer Academic.
Lenson, D. (1995). A Phenomenology of Addiction. In D. Lenson (Author), On drugs (pp. 31-50). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Retrieved October 13, 2020, from http:www.jstor.org/stable/10.5749/j.cttttrgp.8.
Lévinas, E., Lingis, A., & Bernasconi, R. (2017). Existence and existents. Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (2014). Phenomenology of perception: An introduction. London: Routledge.
Parekh, S. (2018). Refugees and the ethics of forced displacement. London ; New York: Routledge.
Remarque, E. M., & Wheen, A. W. (2013). All quiet on the western front: A novel. New York: Random House Trade Paperbacks.
Sartre, J. P. (1994). Being and nothingness. New York: Gramercy Books.
