---
title: "Freedom & Liberty"
date: 2025-08-13
draft: true
description: "These terms seem to be used interchangeably when they, in fact, have an inverse relationship."
tags: ["philosophy", "politics"]
---

These terms seem to be used interchangeably quite often when they, in fact, have an inverse relationship. Liberty is your God-give right to self-actualize, to walk the Earth in search of adventure and enlightenment. If that's not what you're doing with it, I can't help you. Freedom, on the other hand, is a gift from your fellow travelers that helps you maintain your liberty. Often this other is the state but in the long run and at it's base it is a the gift we give each other whether it is part of a social contract to be a civilized, well-ordered people, whether it is in my self-interest to reciprocate such in principle, or whether I am simply indifferent to you. God gave you the tools to exploit the successes of those who reared and educated you and to recover from their mistakes. God gave you the ability to think critically and to conduct yourself in manner that will encourage your success whether it is as a member of that civilized, well-ordered group, whether you realize your success is contingent upon others', or whether it's by minding your own business.  For those already hung up on the use of God so far, it is merely a shorthand that reflects the attitude of the author. The words above survive the replacement of God with whatever source of life or consciousness you ascribe to. Ulitmately, Liberty is innate to our being. It is Liberty that compels me to write this and it is freedom I tacitly request from you to allow me to express my interpretation of the world, the freedom I afford you to use it metaphorically to fit the way you interpret the world and it is something more interesting than either of those concepts that motivates us to understand one another - each in a language that makes most sense to us.
That should be enough on the topic. From this premise anyone should be able to move forward and just do their best. But we are a species incredibly bound to language and words, often for no better reason than habit or  self-interest. It turns out when there's a few hundred million of us, statistically it is incredibly unlikely that we all make the same deductions, prioritize the same values, or use the same measure of success in the process of self-actualization. As was noted, freedom is a gift and no one is entitled to it. You can make all the rules and enforce all the laws you want but nothing other than intentional action is going to keep me from putting a brick through your skull if I deem it a sensible solution to the obstruction of my understanding of self-actualization. There may be well-advertised consequences for doing so but there are two important characteristics of consequences: a) they occur after the act has been committed and b) they are only meaningfully evaluated by their target. The consequences of any action are evaluated in some quantitative measure as is the conceptual resolution of my dilemma. The mechanisms of the black box that breaks this down to an arithmetic problem are complex but somehow a "yea" or "nay" is reached. More often than not, people aren't getting smashed in the head with a brick at the end of each of these encounters but anything with a non-zero probability of occurring will, in fact, happen eventually.  I have tried to keep this from being a dated piece but I feel that some specific language as it is being used contemporarily is necessary to make my point.
I am writing this in the US in the wake of the 2024 Presidential Election. It is an emotional time for a lot of people if for no other reason than over the last decade, Americans and much of the Western world has been convinced that politics is the most salient feature in their pursuit of self-actualization. The veracity of that conclusion is dubious but it does seem that the stakes are higher than they used to be. I'm not certain that's the case, but regrddless it seems to be the prevailing attitude, at least in the West. What is being given center-stage is typified by the term "woke." Itself, this term is problematic in that is has been co-opted by all to nearly comic effect. To any American English speaker, it should be plainly obvious that intentional mis-conjugation is a feature of African American Vernacular Slang. My choices here to describe this term are that absurd mouthful of an academic term or simply saying "how black folks talk" and both raise feathers. Neither is meant pejoratively and I'm just trying to get to the meat of this. We all know that American black culture (and other cultures) have their own way of communicating colloquially and in a lot of cases and in a lot of variations the results can be musical, hilarious, dramatic or simply effective. This is why we pay Sam Jackson a million dollars everytime he says "mother fucker" and we don't pay any white dudes that much money for articulating a hard-R "mother fucker." Once in awhile we might (See "Die Hard" - 1988) but not as a discernable pay-scale. And we know that it isn't a spelling distinction because Jules' wallet says "Bad Mother Fucker."
So "woke?" Even if we conjugate it to "Having Been Awakened" that sentiment reflects a way of speaking about enlightenment that is cultural - more closely related to black Christian Evangelical phrasing. It isn't a very white sentiment to allude to a state of being arrived at as though having been metaphorically asleep and thus unaffected or otherwise unmoved by the happenings that have been going on while you slept cozy in your room. Having risen and drawn back the curtains, we see the world in tatters and we should feel some sense of urgency in reclaiming and re-civilizing this apocalyptic Hell-scape. I mean that phrasing was incredibly white, but the sentiment "oh so now you awake" is less so.
To go a bit further, as an awakening, if my origin story here is at all accurate, it was probably intended to refer to white people realizing that there is overwhelming evidence of sustained systemic abuse in the form of violence on the part of the law enforcement community aimed at black Americans.
So white people stop fucking saying "woke." We were supposed to internalize it, not coopt it. Now It has lost all meaning and we had no business talking like that in the first place.
But the sentiment remains. Unfortunately, it encompasses a whole host of largely liberal values and they all seem to have been given equal footing. This is a mistake that the Democrats have consistently made my entire life. That we have put on equal footing an intolerance for murdering people during a traffic stop and the transgression of not referring to you in the third-person buy the preferred term that you that adheres to know rules of language but is rather determined by you alone and must be explicitly reported to others, is insane. First, the presumption that I am going to talk about you later to another to an extent that will require a pronoun to keep the sentences from sounding arbitrarily repetitive is remarkably self-absorbed. In all likelihood, nobody is interested in you and is certainly not having lengthy discussions about you later. If your existential intent was to be of such a spectacle that we would more than likely want to talk about you later, then that's incredibly sad. Otherwise, the grammarian motivation behind pronouns was meant to simpliy speech, not complicate it.
I want everyone to be afforded al the dignity I am able to imbue and the freedom to self-actualize. I do not want to inadvertantly hurt anyone's feelings and I am aware that there are whole blind spots that -----