---
title: "The story we need"
date: 2025-08-13
draft: false
description: "We need a new story"
tags: ["philosophy", "politics", "life"]
----

Times like this, we need stories. Personally, I like a nice heartwarming story about a kid and a horse. Or when kids get in over their heads and take on a little more than we think they're capable of. Those are nice stories. They make me feel good. But feeling good doesn't get you out of trouble. More often than not, it let's you ignore the trouble until it's knocking on your door. Even then, it can be tempting to hold your breath and mute the tv and duck under the covers - crouch and watch for shadows to stop moving under the door. Times like this we need a story about a person that's just trying to keep his head down and be a worker among workers. You see this guy and he seems a little meek, but you've seen stories like this and your gut tells you that he's just trying not to do something that'll have consequences beyond his control. This guy has a past he isn't all that comfortable with but, more than likely, afforded him a certain set of charater traits and skills that have a certain value in difficult circumstances. Liam Neeson's warning to his daughter's kidnapper  i *Taken* captures this well - "*a very particular set of skills. Skills I have acquired over a very long career. Skills that make me a nightmare for people like you. . .*" But these anti-heroes are always former elite-something-or-others: a gunfighter, a space coyboy, a Navy SEAL, some kind of hacker that was at MIT when he was 8. Such a resume gives the writer some freedom to get the character out of seemingly-impossible situations - situations that *are* impossible for the layperson. But most of us *are* *laypeople*, or, more accurately, *I am* and but I can hold my own from time-to-time. 