---
title: "In Defense of AA"
date: 2025-08-13
draft: false
description: "Much like Catholicism, dismissing the efficacy of 12-step solutions because of their practitioners is sort of insane."
tags: ["recovery", "AA", "addiction"]
---

Much like Catholicism, dismissing the efficacy of 12-step solutions because of their practitioners is sort of insane. In Catholicism, I’d say it was just what the devil wants. In sobriety, it’s just what my addiction wants.

I’m going to digress for the first time of what will be several in this little note. If I have learned anything about opponents of any sort of organized thought, it is that they want to itemize the things they don’t like about it from soup to nuts. So I will not rely on a preamble here to do my dirty work and lay out the givens in this case. We will take everything as it may come from the belligerent.

I don’t think you have to believe in the devil to know that there is objective wrong in the world — even if it isn’t absolute but merely situational. And i dint think you have to believe in evil to think that there are people with motives that do not take your best interest into account. Obviously, I don’t think my addiction is a guy doing pushups in the parking lot waiting for me to slip up. Nobody does. But it does acknowledge the veracity of the hold our compulsion to destroy ourselves has on us. It acknowledges that there is a part of your little brain that wants you to get fucked up. It may not be malicious, with the goal of ruining your life, but neither is the guy who shares his bottle because he doesn’t want to be alone. He doesn’t hope that you burn your life down, he’s not thinking that far ahead. He just wants to fucking hang out for a little bit. But that guy can ruin your life. So can the 7–11 being open at 5 AM. So can an office happy hour or brunch place having bottomless mimosas. Those on my side of this know that all those things are just things that exist incidentally and probably for the benefit of most people. Those on my side know that they are also omens to the insane.

Also, everything you have every learned was taught to you by metaphor because when you’re learning things that are discussed with their own language, it is more efficient to relate it to you in terms of something you’re already learned of which I have a shared knowledge. If you are too smart to need metaphors to understand complex human behaviors that is awesome. Translate them to literal terms in real time and bask in your objective superiority. It will be a fun exercise for you to do while the rest of us are trying to keep up.

Here’s a good on — an analogy no less.

AA meetings are different from most places that most people spend time. We (Americans at least) are pretty homogenized people. Most of our time is spent with people who share socially salient characteristics with us. Most of us spend a third of our life working and we work with people who are generally of the same social class, general education level and practical beliefs. This is not always true and if you’ve already piped up about how your different, you’re going to have a lot of fun reading this because you’re the single most common type of person in AA. I work tangentially for the Department of Justice by way of having worked in the legal business for 20 years discounting a few years here and there. I have two master’s degrees — one in the humanities and one I’m working on in STEM. In the last 11 years, I have worked as the oldest living counter kid at a pizza shop (for 7 or those years) and I have carried buckets of piss and shit down 6 flights of stairs first thing in the morning. Dry-wallers leave them for you on the jobsite after an overnight shift when the plumbing isn’t finished on the project.

So let’s take some of the favorites about AA. These will not be in the order you think they should be. I am super sorry. They are not ranked by any sort of system. They are in the order they occurred to me when reflecting on the desperate pleas of people who wanted to change who they were without changing who they were.

“It’s full of hypocrites!” — Yeah, that’s true. Have you been anywhere there’s an loosely organized group of people whose organization is characterized by a common goal like work, or a traffic-packed road or a grocery store or church, or a Thanksgiving dinner, or seen what happens on C-Span? The world is full of hypocrites and bad actors and people who exploit others for their personal gain or people that jus want to gum up the works. But we don’t have to straw-man our way out of this, the point of bringing up other groups is that it is statistically impossible for there not to be bad people in AA. In fact, even characterizing anyone as bad is probably a mistake so let’s digress again.

When we’re on the highway in traffic, most of us just want to get to our destination efficiently and the way to accomplish that is by all of us moving one step at-a-time at a common speed to get to the part of the road where we all realize that it was those same fellow victims in traffic taking an extra three seconds to check out the cause of the whole thing. But on the way to that we’ve got a lot of people to deal with. We’ve got the guys in BMWs first of all. Let’s just make them the only bad guys on the road. They’re considering taking the shoulder on either side to get ahead a little. Some of us righteous folks are keeping an eye on them. We see them sneaking up and start to block half the shoulder to keep them in check. They lose their fucking mind but not too too much because they know what they were doing. They slink back into line and try to come up with another scenario where not using their signals will maximize their awesomeness. We, however, have done our part and we can tell that our like-minded fellow travelers approve and are impressed that we took the initiative to be the one to mitigate this nonsense. We stepped up when we were needed. We are heroes if you think about it.

Turns out the guy in the BMW was the dad from Signs — Reverend Graham Hess. It wasn’t even his BMW, he borrowed it from some parishioner he was meeting with because he wanted a high-performance vehicle to get him to the accident site no-holds-barred. Now, we know that his wife, Colleen, was out for a walk and is pinned to a tree by Ray Reddy’s car — essentially cut in half. The car is the only thing holding her guts in. Graham was told that it was a bad accident and he should get there as soon as possible but he doesn’t know about the guts thing. Now she’s gonna die without telling him what to tell the kids and Merrill and let me just tell you that it will make for a shitty ending and an M. Knight Shyamalan movie without the crafty ending is not really much of a story.

So did we do something wrong now that we have this knowledge? I mean we have a lot of experience with driving and have seen people get away with this move a hundred times. We were in a position to intervene. And yet, the point of the shoulder is for emergencies and not all people in emergencies have official vehicles with the appropriate visual cues to let us know that they have business with emergency stuff. Was it our job to make this evaluation? If not us, who? What was our motivation? Were we excited at the opportunity to show our fellow travelers how awesome we are? Did we want this bully to know that we weren’t gonna take his shit like he’s used to? We’re going to talk a lot about ego so we don’t even have to get started on that yet. The simple answer is that you did nothing wrong but you are responsible for your contribution to Graham’s fate — which is not entirely grim it just isn’t as exciting. Merrill can probably figure out on his own that beating the alien to death with the most accessible weapon in the room is the way to go. Morgan will still survive because of his asthma. Will Graham put the collar back on though? Who knows, but you did contribute to his misfortune in not getting to spend time with Colleen in her fleeting last moments and for that you can and should atone.

Nobody likes finding out they did something wrong. We all want to be told that what we did was ok. Everything we do is not OK and that goes for everyone, not just alcoholics and Catholics. Alcoholics are kind of lucky that we recognize that evaluating our behavior, coming to terms with the fact that we are not infallible and trying to do better is an experience that pays dividends. This is the impasse that has caused so much strife over climate change, cigarettes, and Covid. Those in favor of trying to mitigate the impact acknowledge that we have contributed extensively to the problem so maybe we can minimize it. And though there are those among them who would demonize any and all fossil fuel use, the majority are not interested in demonizing anyone, the just think they regardless of fault or when this was foreseeable we are going to have a problem and perhaps we could do something about it.

Those on the other side are not opposed to the idea of there being climate changes, they just desperately don’t want to be told that it is their fault — to the point of denying the possibility that humans could even affect the climate of a huge planet in the first place. So fearful of being “in trouble” that they’ve been willing to call into question the veracity of the science which, in turn, has resulted in shitty dudes (and women) with lab coats to do bad science to try to make explicit illustrations of human impact on the planet.

Think about that. It is the definition of childish behavior any any first-year therapist could take care of this yet here we are living in a world that has been corrupted by bad information and bad data all because people can’t admit shit like “yeah cigarettes are probably bad for you but you really like them and some shit is bad for you. You can live a little longer with no joy or a little less with tons and tons of full-flavor satisfaction.”

We’re supposed to be talking about hypocrites and here we are talking about making amends. That is the trouble with recovery. It’s structure is spherical not linear. So yeah, full of hypocrites. Of what flavor? Name it. Trying to get laid, thinks they’re the king of AA, whatever it is you feel they aren’t practicing what they’re trying to convince you they are. There’s a couple of ways of approaching this. The one that comes to mind for me is “who gives a shit?” I know a guy that has been talking like an old-timer since the day he showed up in rehab. Now he’s an old-timer and people don’t know he’s full of shit. But is he? Vonnegut gleefully taught us that we are “what we pretend to be, so be careful what you pretend.” The context of that is a guy who was deep deep deep under cover with Nazis. So deep he had to do Nazi shit to keep his cover. At the end of it all, whatever good he was able to do as a spy was totally undone by what he had to do to keep up that cover. That’s what he’s talking about. In the end, the guy was just a fucking Nazi by all accounts. So flip that in this case. This guy I know has finally earned the right to talk the way he does. He’s got a legit story and some real shit he has had to deal with from his alcoholic past and his recovery past. But that only matters to me, because I am obsessed with context. The newcomer doesn’t have time for context. If they hear something that clicks, they should latch onto it and put it on a pillow.

But here is the kicker — and the hardest thing for ego-driven people to learn: if it doesn’t click, it doesn’t click for you. It may not apply to you. I can guarantee you that you weren’t in that person’s mind when they thought of it and you weren’t in mind when they shared it. We like to say “if it ain’t yours, don’t pick it up.” That’s more profound than it seems on its surface. Masks as a filter are meaningless on a molecular level? No shit sherlock, we weren’t trying to protect you. You know what is large enough to be stopped by a piece of cloth? Spit and phlegm from your lungs that carry the virus and give it a little shield that let’s it survive airborne and on surface for longer than an exposed virus molecule can. All that was being suggested was that since this thing moves fast and it is likely you’ll be unknowingly infected and interacting with others, it would be great that if you cough, we minimize the fucking spray radius of your output. And you know why we care about that? It isn’t because we think everyone who gets sick is going to die. It is because a LOT of people who get sick are going to go to the hospital. And some of them are going to need to be in the hospital. And some of them are going to be in real respiratory distress and will require some of the limited resources we have to mitigate that distress.

Now to me, that would be enlightening new data that would make me reevaluate my attitude. I am not special, I think a significant portion of people are (still) rational and I think rational people are willing to shift their position in light of new information. However, there is a significant portion of American society that has shifted to “all-in all-the-time” or, as I like to call it when it’s me, “committed to the bit.” Now the latter comes from pulling jokes that may go to far but being willing not to break character or the 4th wall and seeing it through. It can have hilarious or disastrous results. If there were even a hint that the majority of these “all-in” people were smart enough and well-meaning enough to be performing some kind of educational bit, I would encourage it. If they are, it isn’t landing which brings us to another issue. The problem with satire is that when it doesn’t land, it can be embraced literally and cited as cosigning your own psychotic thinking. That’s probably why it is specifically protected speech97 in this country. The powers that ruled on that were probably like “Look, we get what you were doing and frankly you can’t be held accountable for people too stupid to understand what you’re saying.”





